What are SOLID Principles?
SOLID Principles -

It is the set of five deign principles for object oriented programming  developed by Robert C. Martin, also known as "Uncle Bob"  in his 2000 paper “Design Principles and Design Patterns.”

SOLID Acronym

SOLID is an acronym that stands for five key design principles:

1. Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)  
2. Open-Closed Principle (OCP)
3. Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP)
4. Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)
5. Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)

Advantages of SOLID Principles :-

Achieve the reduction in complexity of the code
Increase readability, extensibility, and maintenance
Increase scalability, code flexibility, and readability
Achieve Better testability
Reduce tight coupling
Reduce error and implement Reusability
Increase Parallel development

1. Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)   A class should have one, and only one, reason to change.
A class should only have one responsibility .

2. Open-Closed Principle (OCP) -  A software entity/module (class) should be open for extension but closed for modification.
Rule - Add new feature without breaking existing functionality.

3. Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP) - Derived or child classes must be substitutable for their base or parent class.

OR

Objects of a super class should be replaceable with objects of its sub classes without altering the desirable properties of a program.   


class Base
{
}

|| 

class Child extends Base
{

}

Means Sub type substitutable for super type.

This Principle is not limited to is a relation but also force you to follow is substitutable rule 

Note -
   
1. Child is the Sub Class of Base 
2. Object of Base should be replaceable with objects Child

Implementation Guidelines -

a - Avoid Inheritance when subclass cannot satisfy the behavior of its super class. 
b - No new exception can be thrown by sub type.
c - Separate class or interface are often better for represent the distinct behaviour.
d - Encourage the Robust polymorphism. 
e - New Derived classes just extends without replacing the functionality of Base class

