1.Why are hashcode() and equals() methods important in java?
2.Why does equals get called less frequently than hash code in Hashmap?
3.Can you tell me the condition where the finally block will not be executed?
4.Can an interface have a constructor in java?
5.Can a constructor return anything?
6.Can a constructor be declared final and static?
7.What are is-a and has-a relationships in java?
8.how does encapsulation work using private fields and getters/setters.
9.What are some commonly used annotations in spring boot?
10.what is the difference between @Value and @ConfigurationProperties?
Single property,structured config,cleaner approach.
11.what is the default loggin framework used in spring boot?
12.what is field injection and what are its drawbacks?
@Autowired field, hidden dependency,hard testing,no immutability.
13.what is the purpose of @Postconstruct and predestroy?
@Postconstruct init,@PreDestroy cleanup.
14.what is caching and how have you implemented it in your projects?
Store frequent data,@Cacheable,@CacheEvict,Redis.
15.What is an index in sql and why is it used?
faster lookup,column structure,Reduce scan.
16.Have you ever optimized a database query? how?
Query Optimization-identity slow query,Execution plan,Add indexes,Optimize joins,Reduce data.
17.what are functional interfaces in java?Can you name some built in ones?
Functional interfaces- one abstract method,lambda support,runnable,callable,comparator.
18.why is comparable not considered a functional interface?
comparable concept-compareTo method,not lambda focused,natural ordering,comparator preferred.
19.How are your APIs communicating in a microservices Architecture?
API communication-REST calls,sync communication,Async communication.
20.what happens if booking succeeds but payment fails in a microservices system?
Distributed transaction-saga pattern,compensation action,booking rollback.
21.How do you handle concurrent users hitting the same API?
concurrency handling-synchronization,stateless design,scaling.
22.How would you design a system to handle high traffic for the same request?
High traffic desing, load balancer ,caching.
23.How would you desing a system to handle high traffic for the same request?
High traffic design- load balancer,cashing.
24.How do you secure APIs using jwt authentication?
JWT security-token based,token validation,User info.
25.How does OAuth 2.0 work?
OAuth 2.0-Authorization server,Access token,no password sharing.
26.What is the half open state in a circuit breaker?
Circuit breaker states-Closed state,open state,half open state.
27.Can you create a custom spring boot starter?
Custom starter- Bundle config,dependencies,Auto configuration.
28.What is your current java version and what features do you use from it?
java version usage- java 17-Switch expressions,Stream improvements.
29.What is the .m2 folder and why is it important in maven?
.m2 folder- local dependencies,faster builds,settings.xml.
30.If streams are not allowed how would you solve the same problem?
loop solution-modulus operation,extract digit.
31.What kind of recent features have you worked on in your project?
Project experience-API development,performance tuning,microservices work.
32.Can you implement a solution to sum digits of a number using java streams?
Stream solution-number to string,stream chars,map digits,reduce sum.
33.How does spring boot handle dependency injection?
34.what is circuit breaker pattern and where is it used?
35.How do you ensure data consistency in microservices?
data consistency-no global transaction.
36.what is the difference between monolithic and microservices architecture?
37.What is the difference between REST and SOAP web services?
REST VS SOAP - lightweight rest,http methods,json format,xml protocal.
38.how does the kafka producer and consumer work?
kafka flow- producer sends data,topic storage,partitions,consumer reads,parallel consumption.
39.what are deadlocks and how can you avoid them?
dealocks- thread waiting,circular dependency,lock ordering.
40.how does multithreading improve application performance?
multithreading- parallel execution,cpu utilization,redices response time,IO performance.
41.what happens internally when you call the main method in java?
program execution flow-jvm starts,class loading ,main method entry,main thread, static block first.
42.what are the different types of memory areas in jvm?
JVM memory areas- Heap,stack ,method area.
43.What is the difference between List and set in java.
44.How does pagination work in spring data jpa?
Pagination-Pageable,Page object,page number ,page size,limit offset.
45.what is the difference between eager and lazy loading ?
eager vs lazy loading-immediate fetch,on demand fetch.
46.How do you optimize a slow running sql query?
Query optimization-execution plan,indexing,reduce joins, select colums.
47.What is the use of @Autowired annotation?
@Autowired usage-Dependency injection,Automatic wiring,Bean injection,By type.
48.what is the difference between put and post http methods?
put vs post-create resource,update resource,not idempotent.
49.What is the role of dispatcherservlet in spring mvc?
DispatcherServlet-front controller,request handling,handler mapping,controller call.
50.How do you implement cashing in a spring boot application?
Cashing-@Cacheable,@CacheEvict,Redis,In memory cache,performance boost.
51.Can you exaplain the difference between Hashmap and concurrentHashmap?
key value storage-Hashmap not thread safe,concurrentHashmap thread safe,concurrent reads and writes,CAS/locking.
52.What happens if you do not override the hashCode() and equals() methods properly?
bucket placement,object comparision,Duplicate Objects,Retrieval issues.
53.How does spring boot autoconfiguration work internally?
Auto-configuration-@EnableAutoConfiguration,Classpath based,Conditional loading.
54.Can you explain the concept of immutability in java?
State cant change,new object created,Thread safe design,final fields,no setters.
55.What are the differences between ArrayList and LinkedList?
Dynamic array ,Doubly linked list,fast access,fast insertion/deletion.
56.How do you handle exceptions in a spring boot application?
Global handling,@ControllerAdvice,@ExceptionHandler,Error response.
57.What is the difference between @Component,@Service and @Repository?
58.How does the JVM manage memory?
Heap,stack,method area,garbage collection.
59.what is the difference between checked and unchecked exception?
compile time checked,runtime unchecked,
60.How does the @Transactional annotation in spring?
@Transactional working-Transaction begins,Commit on success,rollback on failure,proxy based.
61.What are the advantages of using microservices architecture?
microservices advantages-independent deployment,easier scaling,Team independence,Added complexity.
62.How d you secure rest APIs in spring boot
REST API security-spring security ,Authentication,Authorization,JWT,OAuth2.
63.what is the difference between final ,finally and finalize?
final keyword,finally block,finalize method.
64.How does garbage collection work in java?
Garbage collection-unused objects,Heap cleanup,eligible objects,G1/ZGC.
65.what are functional interfaces in java 8?
one abstract method,lambda support,Default methods allowed,comparator/runnable.
66.How does the stream API work in java 8?
67.What is the difference between synchronized and volatile?
locking,mutual exclusion,visibility only,no atomicity.
68.How do you implement paginaion in spring boot?
Pagination-Pageable,Page Size,Page number.
69.what is the dependency injection and why is it important?
framework managed objects,Bean injection,reduced coupling.
70.what is the difference between REST and SOAP web services?
71.How do you handle concurrency issues in java?
72.what are the different types of joins in SQL?
73.How do you optimize a slow-running query?
74.what is the difference between put and post methods in REST?
75.what is the use of @Qualifier annotation in spring ?
76.How does spring handle bean lifecycle?
Instantiation,dependency injection,initailization,@Postconstruct,@PreDestroy.
77.what is the difference between requestparam and pathvariable?
78.how do you handle null values safely in java?
null handling-null checks,Objects.requireNonNull,Optioanl,defensive coding.
79.what is the purpose of the Optioanl Class?
Optioanl purpose-Avoid null,value wrapper,isPresent.
80.what is the difference between ExecutorService and Thread?
81.How can you include jetty and exclude tomcat in spring boot application?
82.If there are two beans of the same type how does spring decide which one to inject using @Autowired?
83.Can you expalin the solid priciples?
84.Can Primitive datatypes be null?
85.Your spring boot application starts very slowly .how would you debug the startup performance issues?
Enable debug logs,Bean initialization,Actuator endpoint.
86.what is the singleton design pattern and where is it used?
87How would you handle high cpu utilization in an application?
88.what is optional in java?
89.can we override auto-configuration in spring boot?
90.what are the different types of dependency injection in spring boot?
constructor injection,field injection,setter injection.
91.what are some shortcuts or productivity tricks you use in your daily development work?
intellij shortcuts,code generation,Debug mode.
92.Can Treeset contain null? why?
null not allowed ,sorting based,comparator issue,NullpointerException.
93.Whats the difference between @OneToMany and @ManyToOne?
94.If one of your microservices goes down and others depend on it.how would you handle the situation?
95.Whats the difference between retry and circuit breaker?
96.How does java handle memory management?
Garbage collection,Heap Objects,unused object cleanup,GC algorithms,Memory leaks.
97.How would you disable auto-configuration for a specific class in a spring boot?
exlude attribute,class exclusion,Properties exclusion.
98.How does Spring boot handle dependency injection?
Dependency Injection-IOC container,Bean creation,component scanning,@Autowired,Constructor injection.
99.Can you exaplain a taugh production bug  you faced and how you debugged and resolve it?
Real issue,check logs,Metrics analysis,Request tracing,Root cause fix.
100.Have you written test cases for asynchronous method?
Async method testing- CompletableFuture,Awaitility,wait for completion,success case,failure case.
101.whats the difference between Git rebase and cherry pick?
102.whats the difference between @Autowired and XML based dependency injection?
103.why does not rollback work for checked exceptions in spring?
104 Why is hashmap not thread safe?
no synchronization,Data corruption risk,Lost updates,ConcurrentHashMap alternative.
105.How would you sort employees by salary efficiently?
comparator usage,checked exception default,Stream API,Timsort,Scale consieration.
106.If multiple threads update a shared volatile variable is data integrity guaranteed?
107.what is the load factor in hashmap?
load factor-default 0.75,resize trigger,collission control.
108.Are there any internal configurations for the @Transactional annotation?
@Transactional config-propagation,isolation level,timeout,readOnly flag.
109.Why is implementing runnable considered better than extending thread?
Sepration of logic,No inheritance limit,reusable tasks,thread pool support.
110.If a junior developer faces a production issues under a tight deadline,How would you take over or guide them?
111.what is the difference between Docker and virtual machine?
full os vm,container lightweight,shared os,fast startup.
112.how do you handle blue green and canary deployments?
blue green switch,zero downtime,canary rollout,gradual traffic.
113.How would you implement authentication and authorization in microservices?
JWt/Oauth,central auth,token validation,role based access.
114.How do you handle configuration management across environments?
Applicaion Profiles,Dev/QA/Prod,External config,Config server.
115.How would you implement cashing in a spring boot application?
@EnableCashing,@cacheable,Redis,Cache invalidation.
116.How does ConcurrentHashmap achieve thread safety without locking the entire map?
fine grained locking,ucket level control,lock free reads.
117.How does garbage collection work in java?
Heap objects,unused detection,mark and sweep.
118.What is the difference between redis and in memory cashing?
in memory local,fast access,redis distributed,shared cache.
119.How would you handle versioning in REST APIs?
URl versioning ,Header versioning.
120.How do you handle database transactions accross multiple microservices?
Distributed transaction-no single DB,Two phase commit,saga pattern,compensating actions.
121.what is the difference between optimistic locking and pessimistic locking in JPA?
Optimistic no lock,version check,pessimistic row lock,performance vs safety.
122.What is the difference between PUT and PATCH in REST APIs?
full update ,partial update,replace resource,modify fields.
123.What is the difference between @RestController and @Controller?
124.How do you secure a spring boot application?
Authentication,Authorization,JWt token.
125.What is the difference between fetch=LAZY and fetch=EAGER in JPA?
on demand fetch,immediate fetch,performance impact,LazyINitializationException.
126.what happens if a subclass defines a satatic method with same signature as in the super class?
Static method hiding-method hiding,not overriding,reference type based.
127.Have you worked on migrating from monolithic architecture to microservices?
monolithic to microservices-bounded contexts,gradual split,database separation,REST or kafka,deployment challenges.
128.Can ConcurrentModificationException occur in a single threaded environment?
single thread possible,modify during iteration,iterator detection.
129.how do you resolve a circular dependency issue in spring?
constructor fails,setter injection,@Lazy usage.
130.if two keys have the same hash code but are not equal what happens in a hashmap?
Hash collission-same bucket,equals check,multiple entries,list/tree structure.
131.In which scenarios will the finally block not execute?
fianlly block-jvm crash, System.exist(),power failure.
132.What is classpath and how are beans discovered and registered?
classpath & beans- Class locations,Component scanning,Annotation detection.
133.How does java achieve polymorphism?
134.What are interfaces in java and how do they differ from abstract classes?
Interface:contract
Abstract:partail logic
multiple inheritance
single class extend.
135.If a transactional method calls a non transactional method wil the transaction apply to it?
Transaction behavour-proxy based,internal call issue,external call works.
136.What are different bean scopes in spring?
bean scopes- singleton,Prototype,Request,session.
137.What is thread pool and why do we use it?
138.Can we customize JWT token?
JWT customization-header,payload,signature,custom claims.
139.Have you worked with the Java Date Time API?
java.time package.
immutable classes
Thread safe.
140.How do you monitor and log microservices in production?
Centralized logging,ELK stack,Prometheus,Grafana.
141.What is the purpose of ZOOKEEPR  in kafka?
Metadata management,Broker tracking,Leader election,Coordination.
142.How do you handle duplicate messages in kafka?
Idempotent processing,Unique message ID,skip duplicates,Exactly one option.
143.what is the difference between kafka partitions and consumer groups?
144.How do you ensure consistency in a distributed system?
distributed consistency-eventual consistency,event driven,idempotency.
145.what is the difference between blocking and non-blocking I/O?
146.How would you optimize a slow SQL query in production?
Query Optimization-Execution Plan,Add indexes,Optimize joins.
147.What happens if you dont override hashCode() when overriding equals?
148.How would you desing a rate limitter for an API?
rate limitter design-limit type,redis storage,request count,token bucket,sliding window.
149.When happens internally when you call stream.parallel() in java?
parallel stream-ForkJoinPool,Dataspliting,parallel threads,Result merge,overhead cost.
150.what is the difference between fail fast and fail safe iterators?
151.Why do we need service,repositoy and conroller in spring boot?
152.How do you create and use custom exceptions in java?
custom exceptions-Extend Exception,Extend RuntimeException,Specific conditions,Custom messages.
153.what causes NoUniqueBeanDefinationException in spring ?
Bean ambiguity-same type beans,Injection conflict,@Qualifier,@Primary.
154.what makes an interface a functional interface?
functional interface-one abstract method,default methods allowed,static methods allowed,lambda support.
155.what is the difference between Vector and ArrayList?
verctor synchronized,ArrayList not synchronized.
156.Have you used @Query(JPQL) in spring Data Jpa?
Query in JPA-Custom queries,JPQL syntax,Entity based,Joins,Optimized queries.
157.How would you handle disagreements with a senior team member?
158.What is the saga pattern in microservices?
159.What does spring.profiles.active do and how do you set it at runtime?
Active Profiles-Environement Config,dev/qa/prod,Properties file,Command line,Environement Variable.
160.Which database have you worked with and why?
161.what is the difference between built in and custom exceptions?
162.What happens when two different keys have the same hash code in HashMap?
Hash collission-same bucket,equals check,Linked List,tree structure.
163.How do you configure application.properties in spring boot(.properties vs .yml)
164.How do microservices communicate in your project (REST,kafka,gRPC etc).
165.How would you protect confidential data in a spring boot application used by multiple users with different roles?
I will ensure every user logs in properly so identity verification is always done first.
Based on user roles i will define clear authorization rules so only permitted users access sensitive information.
I will encrypt important data while storing it and while transferrign it over the network.
secrets like passwords tokens or keys will be stored securely outside the codebase.
i will also maintain logs to track who accessed or modified sensitive data 
this layered security helps keep critical information safe.
167.What steps would you follow if your spring boot application slow down under heavy traffic?
I will begin by monitoring the system using tools like Actuator or logging platforms to identity bottlenecks.
i will analyze logs and performance metrics to detect unusable pattern or errors.
To reproduce the issue i will run performance or load tests.
Using profilers i will examine code level performance problems
based on findings i will optimize database queries add caching or scale resources as required.
continous monitoring will remain in place to prevent similor issues later.

168.If you need a spring boot REST API to manage user details, how will you structure the project?
I will divide the project into Controllers Services and Repositories
Controllers will handle incoming HTTP requests like creating updating retrieving or deleting user data.
Service will contain business logic validations and processing rules.
Repositories will manage database interaction such as saving or fetching records.
This layerd structure keeps responsibilities clear and simplifies future changes.
It also makes testing and maintenance much easier.

169.If you had to increase the capacity of a spring boot app to handle heavy traffic what would you do?
First I will scale horizontaly by running multiple instances of the application.
then we can add a load balance so incoming requests get distributed across those instances.
If the application is large we can split it into microservices so each module can scale separately based on demand.
I will use auto scaling features in cloud flatforms so resources adjust automatically when load increases.
I will add cashing for commonly used data to reduce repeated database calls.
if the architecture needs centralized request handling we can add an API Gateway for routing and authentication handling.
 
170.How would you deploy a spring boot application on a cloud platform and manage config for different environment?
I will package the application using Maven or gradle so it becomes ready for deployment.
then i will choose a cloud service like AWS Elastic Beantalk or Azure App  service to host it.
For Environment based settings I will use spring profiles like dev staging and prod.
I will keep separate properly files such as application-dev.properties and application-prod.properties
During deployment i will activate the correct profile so the right properties are picked automatically.
This ensures each environment runs with correct settings without manual changes in code.

171.How would you desing a spring boot API to handle large file uploads while keeping the system responsive?
172.Suppose your spring boot application suddenly start throwing database connection error.how would you handle this situations?
First I will check database connectivity and confirm whether the database server is reachable.
I will review application logs to see exact error messages and patterns.
I will verify configuration volumes like DB URL,username ,password,and connection pool setting.
If load is high I will tune connection pool size so requests do not fail due to exhaustion.
I will also add proper rertry handling where suitable.
Continous monitoring will help prevent the issue from repeating.

173.How would you organize a spring boot project that serves a static homepage and also shows dynamic server time?
I will keep the main application class and controller classes inside the src/main/java directory
in the controller i will add mappings such as / for the homepage and /time for showing current server time.
Static content like HTML files will go inside src/main/resources/static
Dynamic pages using templates like thymleaf will go inside src/main/resources/templates
All configuration details will saty in application.properties under reources.
this separation keeps static and dynamic content clear and makes maintanance easier.

174.How can a spring boot backend allow requests from a particular frontend domain?
I will use the @CrossOrigin annotation on specific controllers or methods to allow requests from a chosen domain.
if multiple controllers need this i will configure it globally using a WebMvcConfigure bean.
inside that configuration i will define allow origins and mapping clearly.
this helps restrict unwanted cross origin access while allowing the required frontend domain.
proper CORS setup improves security and avoids browser blocking issues.

175.If a spring boot System needs data from an external REST service,how would you integrate it?
I will first create a RestTemplate or WebClient bean using @Bean so it can be injected anywhere
will RestTemplate i will make synchronous HTTP calls using methods like getForObject() by passing the API URL and response type.
if non blocking calles are needed i will prefer WebClient asynchronous communication.
Using WebClient I will call APis with methods like get() then use retrive to access resposnes.
Depending on expected results i will process responses with bodyToMono() for single objects or bodyToFlux for collections.

176.How can application events help different parts of a Spring boot system communicate?
I will define event classes representing important actions such as user registration or system updates.
whenever such actions occur i will publish events from the relevant part of the application.
other components will listen for these events using event listners.
listners can react indepedently without tightly coupling with other modules.
this approach keeps the code modular flexible and easier to maintain 

177.In a IOT use cases how can a spring boot backend process real-time data coming from thousands of devices efficiently?
I will use a messsage system like Apache kafka to collect device data continously.
the backend can consume that stream and process it in real time instead of waiting for batch collection.
I will filter and separate useful data from noise so only meaningful data moves forward for analysis.
For storing results I will use a database that supports fast writes and quick reads for analytics.
this setup allows the system to handle large incoming volume wihout choking.
It also keeps processing smooth even when thousands of devices push data together.

178.How would you add a GraphQL layer to an existing spring boot REST service?
First I will add the required GraphQL dependencies in pom.xml or build.gradle.
I will create a schema file like schema.graphqls inside src/main/resources
then i will create data fetchers to pull data from existing services or from the database layer.
I will configure GraphQL to connect the schema and fetchers properly.
After that i will expose the GraphQL endpoint and ensure it is accessible as expected.
Finally i will test queries using tools like GraphQL or postman to confirm responses are correct.

179.In what situation would a spring boot application switch between multiple databases during runtime and how would it work?
A common example is when users come from different regions like Europe or Asia.
we can route requests so a European user connects to the Europe database and an Asian user connects to the Asia database.
I will add a request based logic that checks the request context and selects the correct data source.
this selection can happen before the database call is made so the correct database is always used.
It improves relevance and can also reduce latency for users in different regions.
the application stays unified but database usage changes based on who is calling it.

180.How can Spring WbFlux be used to fetch data from another service without blocking the application?
I will use WebClient from WebFlux to make non-blocking API calls.
the request will run asynchronously so other operations continue without waiting.
As data arrives i can process it

181.Imagine users complain that API responses are inconsistent between deployments.What steps would you take?
I will first compare configuration across environments to ensure they are consistent.
I will check active Spring profiles to confirm correct properties are loaded.
Reviewing recent deployments and code changes will help Identify differences.
I will verify database schema versions and API dependencies
Logging and version tagging will help track future deployments better.
this structured check helps quickly isolate the root cause.

182.If your Spring boot service needs scheduled background jobs,how would you implement them?
I will use Springs scheduling support with @EnableScheduling.
Then I will add methods with @Scheduled for fixed time or interval execution.
I will ensure jobs run indepedently so they dont block main requests.
Loggin will be added to monitor job execution and failures.
If jobs grow heavy we can move them to separate worker services.
this keeps scheduled processing reliable and manageable.

Suppose your application needs centralized logging across multiple microservices how would you approach it.
I will configure structured logging in each service for consistency.
Logs will be forwarded to a centralized system like ELK or Splunk.
I will add correction IDs so requests can be traced across services.
log levels will be properly defined to avoid unnecessarily noise.
Monitoring dashboards will help quickly delect issues.
this makes debugging distributed systems much easier.

If an external service your app depends on becomes very slow how would you protect your application?
I will add timeouts so requests dont hang indefinitely.
Circuit breaker logic will prevent repeated calls to a failing servcie. 

183.If your Spring boot API suddenly starts returning slow responses after a recent code change, how would you investigate it?
184.Suppose you need to ensure zero downtime while deploying a new version of a spring boot service.How would you handle deployment?
185.Imgegine your application needs to send notifications (email,SMS) after certain actions.How would you desing this?
186.If multiple microservices need shared configuration values,how would you manage them?
187.Suppose users report occasional data inconsistency in your spring boot system.how would you address it?
188.Imagine your spring boot application needs to support pagination and sorting for a large list API.How would you implement it properly?
189.Suppose your service must call an external API,but the external API sometimes returns errors.How would you make your calls safer?

190.What approach would you follow to optimize performance in your spring boot application?
First I will introduce caching for frequently requested data so repeated database hits can be avoided
I will review databse queries carefully and improve slow queries to reduce load on the database.
for tasks like sending emails or heavy processing i will use asynchronous execution so the main request is not delayed.
if traffic grows we can add a load balancer to distribute requests accross multiple instances
i will also review the code logic and improve time complexity whenever possible.
if the system needs to handle many concurrent users we can consider reactive approaches like WebFlux for better responsiveness.


191.How would you use spring profiles to manage different configuration for development and production?
I will create separate 	configuration files like application-dev.properties and application-prod.properties.
Each file contain environment specific settings such as database URLs or API endpoints 
I will activate the required profile using environment variables command line arguments or the spring.profile.active property.
If some beans sould load only in a ceratin environment i will use the @Profile annotation.
this makes switching between environments easy and avoids manual configuration changes
it also keeps the application behavoir consistent accross development and production

192.If your spring boot system need to work with several external APIs,how will you deal with request linit and possible failures?
I will add a circuit breaker so that if an external API keeps failing the system does not keep retrying unnecessarily.
I will implement rate limiting logic to make sure we do not cross the allowed API request limits.
If temporary failures happen i will add a retry mechanism with exponential delay to avoid overwhelming the service.
to reduce repeated calls i will use caching for frequently requested data.
this overall approach keeps the application stable and prevents service disruptions.

193.If your Spring boot application needs to validate incoming request data before saving it,what approach would you follow?
194.Imagine you need to create an audit trail for key actions in your spring boot application.how would you desing it?
195.Suppose your Spring boot app needs to handle a burst of traffic for a short time,like a scale or event.How would you prepare for that?
196.Suppose your Spring boot application needs to support API versioning as features evolve.How would you handle it?
197.Imagine you need to restrict API access based on user request frequency.How would you implement rate limiting?
198.If your Spring boot microservices need secure internal communication what would you do?
199.Suppose your application must support graceful shutdown during deployments how would you manage it?
200.Imagine you need to cache API responses but ensure data freshness.How would you balance both?

201.What is the difference between @component @service @repository and @controller in spring?
all four are spring beans meaning spring will detect them and manage them in the container.
@Component is the generic one - i use it for utility classes or helpers where there is no specific layer meaning.
@Service is for business logic layer like where you write validation orchestration and core flow.
@Repository is for data access layer like DAO or spring Data Repository and it also helps with exception translation into Spring's DataAccessException.
@Controller is for web layer - it handles incoming HTTP requests and returns response views or JSON (with @RestController).

What security concerns should be considered when using WebSocket in a Spring boot application?
Since WebSockets keep a continous connection open i will ensure strong authentication before allowing the connection.

How would you desing a spring boot API to handle large file uploads while keeping the system responsive.

How can Spring WebFlux be used to fetch data from another service without blocking the application.



202.How does dependency injection improve application desing in spring boot?
203.What is the difference between checked and unchecked exceptions in java?
204.How does concurrentHashmap achieve thread safety internally?
205.what are the main advantages of using microservices over monolithic architecture?
206.How does spring boot auto configuration work?
207.spring boot auto configuration tries to configure beans automatically based on what dependencies are present.
It checks the classpath-like if spring-boot-starter-web is there it configures DispatcherServlet,Tomcat,MVC beans etc.
It also checks existing beans-if you already defines onc boot backs off and does not override.
This is driven by conditional annotations like @ConditionalOnClass,@ConditionOnMissingBean,@ConditionalOnProperty.
thats why in most projects we just add starters and things start working without writing tons of config.
if we want to debug it.we can enable debug logs or check the autoconfiguration report.

how are primitive and non primitive data types differentiated based on memory allocation?

How would you handle partial failures in a distributed system?

How does Spring boot decide which auto configuration to apply?
classpath check,property check ,Bean presense.

How would you debug a memory leak in a java application?
What is the difference between serializable and Externalizable?
How do you handle idempotancy in REST APIs?
What is the purpose of @Transactional Propogation level?
why do microservices fail under high load and how do we fix it?
How do you debug a slow API or Dashboard?

1.Can you introduce yourself and briefly explain your recent project?
Have you applied any design principles in your project?
yes and i usually explain it through decisions i made in code not theory
For example single responsibity : i keep controllers thin, services focused, and more mapping/validation to dedicated layers.
open/closed: I design for extension using interfaces and strategy pattern instead of editing a huge if else every time.
dependency inversion: services depends on interfaces and spring injects the right implementation.
I also use composition over inheritance a lot especially when building reusable components.

2.where have you used the singleton design pattern in your application?
3.what is the best way to implement a singleton design pattern?
4.Have you implemented the saga pattern in any project?
5.have you used the builder pattern in real project or personal project?
yes especially when creating complex request/response objects with many optional fields .
builder makes object creation readable and avoids constructors with 10 parameters.
in java Lomboks @Builder is commonly used for DTOs but i still watch for immutability and defaults.
builder is also useful when mapping data from multiple sources into one object like DB+API+config.


6.If production API latency suddenly increases how would you troubleshoot it?
7.what factors like GC pauses ,memory spikes ,or SQL  queries would you check first?
8.how do you debug an issue that works in development but fails in production?
9.what strategies do you use to improve application performance?
10.how do you handle exception management in microservices?
11.what loggin practices do you follow in production system?
12.how do you secure REST APIs in enterprise applications?
13.what is your approach to database query optimization?
14.how do you monitor microservices health in production?
15.what challenges have you faced with distributed systems?
16.how do you manage configuration accross environments?
17.what caching strategies have you used in real projects?
18.how do you handle concurrency issues in java application?
19.what is your experience with messaging systems like kafka?
20.how do you ensure reliable communication between microservices?
21.what ci/CD practices have you followed in your projects?
22.what is you experience with containerization tools like docker?
23.how do you maintain code quality in large teams?
code reviews are mandatory -not just syntax but design performance and readability.
we enforce static analysis tools like sonarqube for coverage ,duplication and security checks.

24.if a secret is accidentally exposed in a public GIthub repository how would you resolve it and prevent it in the future?
First step is immediately revoke that secret or credential.
then generate a new key or password so misuse stops instantly.
next remove it from git history using tools like git filter repo or BFG
just deleting the file is not enough history cleanup is important.
going forward secret should be stored in vault or environtment variables.

which build tools do you currently use and why?
in most spring boot projects we commonly use maven or gradle.
i personally perfer maven for stability ad strong ecosystem support
It helps menage dependencies ,builds,packaging ,and CI/CD integration easily.
gradle is faster due increamental builds so some teams prefer it.

what is a heap dump and when would you use it?
A heap dump is basically a snapshot of JVM memory at a specific time.
it shows all objects ,references ,and memory usage patterns.
we mainly use it when diagnosing memory leaks or outofmemoryerror.
Tools like eclipse MAT or visualVM help analyze heap dumps.

what is the difference between comaparable and comparator in java ?
comparable defines natuaral sorting inside the class itself.
it uses compareTo() method implemented in the model class.
Comparator is external sorting logic defined separately.
it uses compare() method and supports multiple sorting strategies.
if only one default sorting exists comparable works fine.
if multiple custom sortings are needed comparator is better.

why is JWT commonly used in web application?

how would you scale a spring boot application to handle high traffic?

how can database clustering help with scalability?

have you worked with single sign on how was it implemented?

how do you implement API versioning in a REST service?

what is circular dependency in spring and how do you resolve it?

have you implemented password encoding or decoding which approach di you use?

how would you design an API to support both JSON or XML responses?

what is hybrid inheritance in java?

how does java handle memory leaks?

which API Gateway tools have you used in you projects?
common API Gateways are Kong,Apigee ,AWS API Gateway ,Nginx.

what is the comparable interface and when is it used?
comparable is used when you want a natural ordering for objects.
The class implements comparable and overrides compareTo().
Then Collections.sort() or treeset can sort objects automatically.
it is good when there is one obvious sorting like employeeId or name.

how would you investigate a memory leak in a long running java application.

what code coverage percentage do you maintain in your project?

should testing effort be included during story point estimation?

have you encountered ClassNotfoundException how did you resolve it?

what significant performance optimization have you implemented?

can you explain the producer consumer problem and how to implement it in java?

how do you maitain code quality under tight delivery deadlines?

how would you count numeric digits and alphabetic characters in a string?

what major challenges have you faced in your projects?
one big challenge was scalling microservices under heavy load.
latency issues started appearing during peak traffic.
we had to redesign caching and async messaging
Another challenge was production memory leak debuging
cross team coordination during releases was also tricky.
but structured monitoring and communication solved most issues.

which spring boot version are you currently working with?
currently many teams are on spring boot 2.7 or 3.x
migration to sprign boot 3 involves java 17 requirement.
major changes include jakarta namespace updates.
security and performance improvement are noticeable.
dependency compatibility must be verified carefully.
Always align version with project ecosystem stability.

how do you handle merge conflit in git?

if two objects are equal according to equals() can their hashcode be different?

what production level best practices should be followed in a spring boot application before and after deployment?

your system goes down at 3:am due to database overload what actions would you take?

how does spring boot simplify web application development?

which embeded servers does spring boot support and which one is the default?

can you explain spring profiles and their usage?

are you working with maven and what is its role in project management?

what issues can occur with a singleton implemented using a private constructor and why is enum preferred?

how does open/closed principle relate to polymorphism?

can a spring boot application be deployed as a war file to an external server?

what is the purpose of the synchronized keyword in multithreading?

what happnes when you store an object in Hashset?

what is the stragler pattern and when would you use it?

what happens if a return statement is placed inside a finally block?

can private or static method be overriden in java?

what is the difference between lazy and eager loading in Jpa and what is LazyINitializationException

what is method overriding in java

how does spring boot auto configuration work internally?

why should the stream peek method not be used for business logic?

what challenges have you faced while upgrading a java version?

what third party services have you integrated for sending emails?

how would you handle a production issue caused by incorrect configuration properties

what happens if no gloabl exception handler is defined in a spring boot application

difference between spring and spring boot

how does dependency injection improve application design

what is the purpose of spring boot starter?

how does spring boot auto configuration work internally?

what are different bean scopes available in spring?

suppose you need to handle validation errors in a clean and consistent way across all APIs how would you do it?

Imagine your service depends on a third party API and you want to reduce repeated calls for the same data. what would you do?

if your spring boot application needs to process tasks in the background reliably how would you design it?

suppose you need to support bulk data upload through an API endpoint how would you keep it safe and efficient?

suppose you need to add request tracing so you can follow a single user request across multiple services .how would you do it?

Imagine your spring boot API must return different responses based on user role.how would you implement that?

Imagine your spring boot app faces intermittent timeouts in production but not locally how would you troubleshoot it?

suppose you need to handle a situation where the database becomes slow during peak trafficwhat will you do?

if your app must support both synchronous REST calls and async event based processing how would you structure it?

Imagine you need to protect your APIs from accidental breaking changes during development.what steps would you take?

suppose your spring boot application needs to support multi tenant data where each tenant should only see their own records how would you design it?

Imagine you need to introduce feature toggles so some users can a new  feature while oterhs cant how would you implement it?

If one of your microservices goes down and others depend on it, how would you handle the situation?

what is saga pattern in microservice?

how do you handle large data efficiently in an API?

why does not rollback work for checked exceptions in spring?

if multiple threads update a shared volatile is data integrity guaranteed?

how would you design a system to handle high traffic for the same request?

what happens if booking succeeds but payment fails in a microservices system?

what happens when two different keys have the same hash code in Hashmap?

difference between @RequestParam and PathVariable?

how do you handle transactions in spring boot application?

what is the purpose of the @Transactional annotation?

how does garbage collection impact java application performance?

what is the difference between Hashmap and hashtable?

how does kafka ensure message durability?

what is the difference between REST and SOAP web services?

how do you secure REST APIs in spring boot?

what is the purpose of the volatile keyword in java?

how do you resolve merge conflict in Git?

what is the difference between eager loading and lazy loading in Hibernate?

How do you optimize database queries in a spring boot application?

what is the circuit breaker pattern and why is it used?

how do you monitor microservice in production?

what is the difference between docker container and virtual machine?

how do you handle configuration secrets securely in application?

lets say your microservice goes down under sudden load what checks would you perform?

Have you heard about NoSuchBeanDefinationException?

Can you explain a practical use case of the @ManyToOne annotation?

If a RES endpoint returns outdated cached data instead of fresh data what could be the reason?

can we create a server in code java wihtout using spring or other framework

how do you design an immutable class in java?

how does java manage memory allocation between heap and stack?

what is the importance of the finally block in exception handling?

can hashmap itself be made thread safe how?

what is the latest spring boot version available currently?

why are immutable objects useful in concurrent programming?

what are the advantages of java being partially object oriented?

is it possible to customize a specific auto configuration in spring boot?

how would you trace a request across multiple microservices?

If @ConfigurationProperties returns null values what could be wrong?

if large file uploads fail silently in your REST API how would you debug it?

what do you understand about the singleton design pattern?

what is the difference between git clone,git pull,and git fetch?

how would you design an asynchronous notification service for SMS and email?

can you name some built in java exceptions?

what are default methods in java interfaces?

what is a memory leak in java and how does it impact java applications?

Have you writen test cases for asynchronous methods how dod you approach it?

what is the purpose of the volatile keyword in java?

how do you solve or optimize the N+1 select problem in JPA/Hibernate?

which spring boot versions have you worked with?

what makes an interface a functional interface?

have you implemented custom exceptions when would you use them?

how can you implement a custom bean scope in spring?

when should you use an interface versus an abstract class?

what is lazy evaluation in java stream?

ArrayList vs LinkedList which is better for search operations and why?

how do you secure spring boot API endpoints?

how do you implement the singleton design pattern?

how can you create an immutable class in java?

how do you secure sensitive data both in transit and at rest?

how do you decide between parallel stream and sequential streams?

what is the difference between UUIDs and sequential IDs ?

Can Spring boot auto configuration be customized how?

what happens if equals() is overriden without overriding hashCode()?

can you explain the saga design pattern in microservices?

what is the order of precedence for spring boot configuration sources?

how do you configure a spring boot application for multiple environments like dev,test and prod?

which set implementation maintains insertion order and why would you use it?

what is the difference between returning a response with ResponseEntity and without it?

what is a CI/CD  pipeline and why is it important?

should testing effort be included during story point estimation?
what approaches can be used for asynchronous processing in spring boot?
have you ever created a custom spring boot starter?
what is your experience with Docker and kubernetes?

what problems can occur when mutable objects are used as keys in Hashmap?

what is the difference between Git rebase and Git cherry pick?

what is the role of application.properties and how do you manage environment specific configurations?

what is the purpose of the @EnableJpaRepositories annotation?

what happenss if two beans of the same type are defined without a qualifier or @Primary?

what issues can LAZY loading cause in spring boot REST APIs?

how does the singleton design pattern work and what types of situation implementation exist?

if an interface extends another interface and a lambda expression stop working why might that happen?

if you update a dependency in pom.xml but the old version is still used how would you fix it?

how does concurrentHashmap manage concurrency compared to hashmap?

Are you familiar with kiss and dry coding principles?

if your microservices crashed due to sudden traffic spikes how would you investigate?

After upgrading Spring boot your custom bean stopped working because a defualt bean overrides it how would you fix this?

how can you override datasource URLs between environments without changing code?

what challenges do you face when migrating a legacy system to microservices and how do services communicate?

If a spring boot application suddenly needs to handle double the load how would you manage it?

what deployment strategies have you used in production (blue-green,canary,rolling) explain your approach?

are kafka communication asynchronous explain how it works?

After a production deployment issue what would be your first steps to investigate?

what agile ceremonies or processes have you followed and what benefits do they provide?




what is the role of the IOC container in spring?

Are singleton classes thread safe by default?
what is the default embeded web server in spring boot?
can you explain the internal working of spring boot at high level?
have you used synchronized and nonsynchronized methods in your project?
can primitive data types store null values ?
how does abstraction help in achieving loose coupling?
how can you make a class thread safe?
have you implemented any design pattern in your project?
what are spring boot starter dependencies?
what is the Open/closed priciples?
can constructors be overloaded in java?
what does the @SpringBootApplication annotation do internally?

How would you troubleshoot a performance issue where the application is fast in development but slow in production?

how would you revert changes if you accidentally pushed code to the main branch ?

how would you handle concurrent updates to the same data by multiple threads?

what security concern should be considered when using websockets in a spring boot application?

how would you design a spring boot API to handle large file uploads while keeping the system responsive?

how can Spring WebFlux be used to fetch data from another service without blocking the application?

what is string pool?
String pool is nothing but a storage area in java heap where strings it is also known as String intern pool or String Constant pool it is just like object allocation by default it is empty and privately maintained by the java String class.

what is the difference set and list?
what is marker interface give me some example of marker interface?
what is synchronized keyword in java?
what is aggregation in java?
what is immutable class?
immutable class in java means that once an object is created we cant change its content in java.all the wrapper classes (Integer,Boolean,Byte ,Short)and string class is immutable we can create our own immutable class as well.

why java is not 100% object oriented?
what is volatile keyword in java?
what is the internal working of a hashmap?how hashmap works internally?
A hashmap in java stores both key and value objects in a bucket it is stored as an Entry object that implements Map Entry interface.
the key object used in a hashmap has to provide implementation for hashCode(),and equals() method.
when put() method is used to store a key value pair the hashmap implementation calls hashCode() method on Key object to calculate a hash that is used to find a bucket where Entry object will be stored.
when get() method is used to retrive a value stored againts a key object we first calculate a hash of key object thenwe use this hash to find the bucket in which that particular key is stored.
once key objects location is found it may happen that more than one key is stored in same location so now we use equals() method to find the exact key object.once the exact key object is found we use it to get value object.

what is the heap memory in java and what is the stack memory in java?
Stack memory is the space allocated for a process where all the function calls,primitive data types,(int ,double)etc.and local and reference variables of the functions are stored.	on the other hand heap memory is used to store the objects that are created during the execution of a java program.on the other hand heap memory is used to store the objects that are created during the execution of a java program.	

what reflection in java
why do we need reflection API in java?
what is the difference between checked and unchecked exception in java?

what is a functional interface?
can you tell me any example of a functional interface?
how is it different from a default method in the interface?

is it possible to have more than one eureka servers in microservice?
yes

do you know what is hashcode method returns?
what is dependency injection in spring?
what do you understand by continous integration and continous delivery?
how will you implement concurrency in your java program?how do you achieve concurrency?

Explain two types of java memory model?
two types of memory heap and stack do you know about that?
in java where exactly does it store the objects?
in java in which memory JVM stores the objects?

what is the use of pom.xml file in maven apart from dependencies
what are the steps to connect with database in java?
what is the difference between put and patch?
what are the features of treeset?
how the size of the ArrayList increase dynamically?
what is Iterator?
what is listIterator?
what are the methods of iterator?
is there any concurrent version of treeset and treemap?
what type of collections you have used to till now?
have you used arraylist linkedlist hashset treeset abd hashmap?
are collection you know that stores the value in the sorted order?
treeset.
what is fail fast and fail safe in java collection framework?

in which scenario you will go for treeset?
use treeset because it allows unique elements.
use treeset because it provides faster access and retrieval of elements.
use treeset because it stores elements in ascending order.

in the collection there is arraylist and there is linked list right
when you will go for linked list and when you will go for arraylist can you tell me?
when to use linkedlist over arraylist in java?
when would you use an array instead of a linked list?

can you give me some exampples of synchronized collection and concurrent collection?
how treeset is implemented iternally in java?

how does the circuit breaker help make a microservice system more stable?

why is having a separate databse for each microservice usually recommneded?

what is the purpose of the API Gateway in a microservices setup?

how does the retry pattern increase reliability in microservices?

what is the main idea behind the saga pattern in distributed systems?

what are the common difficulties when introducing an API Gateway in microservices?

how do the retry pattern and circuit breaker pattern work together?

how does service discovery support scaling in microservices?

what is the strangler pattern and how does it help modernize old systems?

what is bulkhead pattern and why is it useful in distributed systems?

what are the different states in a circuit breaker and how do they function?

what is the role of service discovery in a microservices environment?

what benefits and drawbacks come with using an even-driven choreography approach?

how does an orchestractor manage workflows between microservice?

what challenges arise when managing multiple databases across microservices?

how does an API Gateway help strngthen security and improve performance?

when should a circuit breaker be applied in a microservices system?

how do client side and server side service discovery approaches differ?

what are compnesating transactions and how are they used in saga workflows?

how can retries be controlled to avoid overwhelming dependent services?

how is communication handled in a choreography based microservices design?

how is data consistency maintained when each microservice has its own databse?

how does resource isolation work in the bulkhead pattern?

how does direct client to service communication differ from using an API Gateway?

what is the disadvantage of microservices ways to address it?

how would you call another service in microservice?

microservice design pattern you know?
Api Gateway-single netry point.
Circuit breaker-stops repeated failling calls
service registry-
db per service
saga.

what is circuit breaker why used?
converting monolith to microservices using Spring boot steps and challenges?

if i autowire prototype bean in a singleton bean how many instances of prototype bean would be created?

can you tell me you have a web application and it is taking some more time to load you have to reduce the load time of this application so what are the things you will optimize i am in there are a number of possibilities you can tell some of them?

I have a try block inside try block i am writing a piece of code that code is throwing IOException then i am writing a catch block inside catch block and hand link runtimeException will that work>

Ok so suppose in your application you are using treemap somewhere earlier it was simple it was a non concurrent system but you are thinking to speed up you want to add some threads and addd a threading environment so for this modification you have to modify i mean you have to use something else instead of treemap what will be your choice in the case of treemap in the concurrent situation?

suppose you are developing software that is related to the share market so you have to store prices what data type do you prefer to store the prices?

in your application you have a java application with and which you need to run some batch services at some particular time and your service are in a different country so how will you handle the timezone scenerio

can you insert and delete at the same time in synchronized map?

you are having your application which is spring version something like 2.3 and your project has some dependency on some other project that project is also using spring 2.3 version now you are moving 	your project from spring 2.3 to spring 2.5 you started getting conflict bacuase of the dependency mismatch  how will you resolve those conflict?

suppose there are two threads thread A and thread B these both threads are operating on a shared resource called c thread A needs to inform B that some important has happned in c what technique do you use in java to achieve this?

what are the security consideations when using @SessionAttributes and @CookieValue annotations?

how do microservices update their registration and discovery information?

what are some common use cases of kafka?
real time data streaming
log aggregation use case
event driven systems
messaging betweeen services
analytics pipeline integration
user activity tracking.

how does an API Gateway manage traffic?
single entry point
routes requests correctly
applies rate limiting
handles authentication
supports caching
protects backend service.

Explain features of spring data jpa?
reduces boilerplatecode
provides crud repositories
query by method names
supports jpql and native queries
build in pagination sorting
integration with hibernate

how do you mock an object in mockito?

what is the disadvantage of microservices? 
how would you call another service in microservices?
microservices design pattern you know?
API gateway-single entry point.
circuit breaker-stops repeated failing calls.
service registry-
db per service
saga-event based distributed transactions.

what is a circuit breaker why used?
converting monolith to microservices using spring boot steps and challenges.

how many threads will open for parallel streams and how does parallel stream internally work?

what are strong,weak,soft,phantom references and what is their role in garbage collection?
strong reference blocks garbage collection.
weak reference cleared during GC.
soft reference survives until memory pressure.
phantom reference after finalization.

what would happen if you override only the equals() method and not hashCode() in a custom key class used in hashmap?

difference between synchronized and reentrantlock?

what is java memory model and how is it linked to threads?

explain the role of @EnableAutoConfiguration Spring boot how does spring boot achieve autoconfiguration internally?

describe a spring boot project where you significantly improved performance what techniques did you use?

discuss the patterns used to handle failures in microservices what is the circuit breaker pattern how does the bulkhead pattern help in improving system resilience can you explain the retry and backoff patterns?

how do you handle data consistency in microservices?

you are experiencing performance issues with certain frequently  accessed data how can you implement caching in spring jpa to imrove performance?

what is optimistic locking in hibernate?

your application needs to store user images safely and cheaply which aws service will you choose and why?
choose amazom s3.

how do you write a test for a method with database calls in junit without hitting the actual database?

which desing pattern would you use to manage database connections effeciently in java application?

how does a circuit breaker help make a microservices system more stable?

why is having a separate databse for each microservice usually recommneded?

what is the purpose of the API gateway in a microservices setup?

how does retry pattern increase reliability in microservice?

what is the main idea behind the saga pattern in distributed systems?

what are the common difficulties when introducing an api gateway in microservice?

how do the retry pattern and circular breaker pattern work together?

how does service discvery support scaling in microservice?

what is the strangler pattern and how does it help modernize old systems

given an array and a target value return indices of the two numbers that add up to the target?
Array [2,7,1,5]
target :9

class Persistance{
main{
int []numbers={2,7,11,15}
int taret=9;
int result=twoSum(numbers,target);
print(result[0])
print(result[1])
}
public static int[] twoSum(int[]arr,int target){
Map<Integer,Integer> map=new Hashmap<>();
for(int i=0i<arra.lenght;i++){
int requirred=taret=arr[i];
if(map.containsKey(required)){
return new int[]{map.get(required),i};
}
map.put(arr[i],i);
}
return new int[]{-1,-1};
}
}
-----------------
Q.what happens internally when spring boot application starts?
1)Main method SpringApplication.run(Applicaion.class,args)
2)SpringApplication 
(i) create application context
(ii).start environment setup.
(iii).load configuration
(iv).trigger auto configuration
(v).scan components.
(vi).Create beans.
All managed by spring IOC container.
3)Applicaion Started.

Q.why do we use @EnableAutoConfiguration internally?
@EnableAutoConfiguration-classpath scanning,reads auto-configuration list,conditional cheching engine,bean creation.

Q.How does spring boot handle Exceptions Globally?
spring boot Globally Exceptions handling
Request comes to controller,Exception occurs,@ControllerAdvice Intercepts exception,Exception Handler method executes,Clients recieves proper response.
Advantage-Centralized handling,clean controllers,consistent responses,better api design,easier maintainance.

Q.Why should field injection be avoided?
field injection problems-
constructor injection(recommeneded)-
why constructor injection wins-better testability,cleaner design,immutable dependencies,easier maintanance.

Q.why does spring boot use proxy objects?
original bean created,spring creates proxy object,request goes through proxy first,Additional logic executes,Actual method executes.

what happens if two beans of same type exist?

why does @Autowired sometimes become null?

why is @Transactional not working in some cases?

why does circular dependency happen in spring ?

what is the difference between @RestController and @Controller internally?
@Controller-Brower request,@Controller,method return string,view resolver,html/jsp page,browser.
@RestController-Client/API request,@RestController,method returns object,httpmessageconverter,json response,client.
@Controller-is mainly for mvc view rendering.
@RestController-is used for REST APIs.@RestController internally includes @ResponseBody.
@Controller-returns view name,uses view resolver,mainly for mvc applications,requires @ResponseBody for json.
@RestController-return response body directly,Automatic convert json/xml,used for rest apis,internally @Controller+@ResponseBody.


optum java interview-
how does concurrent hashmap achieve thread safety internally?
how does the jvm manage memory using stack and heap?
what is dependency inejection and what it is important in Spring?
what happens internally when a spring boot application starts?
how do you externalize configuration in spring boot?
how do transactions work in spring using @Transactional?
what challenges have you faced in production and how did you resolve them?
how do you handle configuration changes without redeploying services?
what is blue green deployment and how does it work?
what is canary deployment and when would you use it?
what is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous communication?
what is n+1 query problem and how do you fix it?



javainterview buddy

When we call an overloaded method, how does the Java compiler choose the correct method?
When we call an overloaded method, the Java compiler checks the arguments we are passing.
It checks the number of arguments and the type of arguments.
Based on that, the compiler selects the best matching method.

Can we overload two methods only by changing the return type while keeping the same parameters?
No, we can't overload a method only by changing the return type.
In Java, method overloading depends on the parameters.
The number of parameters, type of parameters, or order of parameters must be different.
If only the return type is different, the Java compiler will get confused.

Why do we use the @Override annotation when we override a method in Java?
We use the @Override annotation to tell the compiler that this method is overriding a method from the parent class.
If we make any spelling mistake or parameter mistake, the compiler will give an error.
So, it helps us avoid mistakes.

How is method overloading connected with polymorphism in Java?
Method overloading is connected with compile-time polymorphism. In this, the same method name can do different work based on different parameters.
The compiler decides which method to call at compile time.

Can static methods be overridden in Java, or are they only hidden?
No, static methods can't be overridden in Java.
A static method belongs to the class, not to the object.
If we write the same static method in the child class, it is called method hiding, not method overriding.

What happens if a superclass method is overridden by more than one subclass in Java?
If many subclasses override the same method from the parent class, then every subclass will have its own version of that method. At runtime, Java will call the method based on the actual object.


What will happen if we create the main method in Java but forget to make it static?
If the main method is not static, the JVM will not be able to start the program. The JVM calls the main method without creating an object. That is why the main method must be static.

Can we override the main method in Java like we override normal methods in child classes?
No, we can't override the main method.
The main method is static, and static methods can't be overridden. They belong to the class, not to the object.

Can we overload the main method in Java by changing the parameters of the main method?
Yes, we can overload the main method in Java. We can create more main methods with different parameters.
But the JVM will always call the standard main method with a String array argument.

Before Java 8, was it possible to print something on the console without writing the main method?
Yes, before Java 8, it was possible using a static block.
A static block could run when the class was loaded. But from Java 8 onwards, the main method is required to run the program normally.


What rules should we follow when we want to overload a method in Java?
For method overloading, the method name should be the same, but the parameters should be different.
We can change the number of parameters, type of parameters, or order of parameters.
Return type can be different.
But only changing the return type is not enough.

What rules should we follow when we want to override a method from a parent class?
For method overriding, the child class should have the same method name, same parameters, and same return type or compatible return type as the parent class.
The method in the child class replaces the method of the parent class at runtime.

What will happen if we write a return statement inside a try block or catch block? Will the finally block still run, or will it be skipped?
The finally block will still run.
Even if a return statement is written inside the try block or catch block, finally will execute before the method actually returns.
finally is mainly used for cleanup code.


Can we run a Java program using only try and finally without writing any catch block? In which situation can this be useful?
Yes, we can use try with finally without a catch block.
This is useful when we do not want to handle the exception, but we still want cleanup code to run, like closing a file or connection.

In Java, is it allowed to write more than one finally block for the same try-catch block?
No, we can't write multiple finally blocks for one try block. One try can have only one finally block.
If we write more than one finally block, the compiler will give an error.

If two or more exceptions need the same handling logic, how can we handle all of them inside one single catch block?
We can use a multi-catch block.
In this, we write different exception names separated by the pipe symbol.
This helps when the same logic is needed for multiple exceptions.


If we use try-catch-finally many times in a Java application, can it affect the performance of the application?
try-catch-finally has very small overhead. Normally, it does not create a big performance issue.
But if exceptions are thrown again and again in the normal flow, then performance can become slow.

Can a static block throw an exception while the class is loading?
Yes, a static block can throw an exception.
But it should be handled properly. If the exception is not handled, class loading can fail and the program can stop with an error.

Can primitive data types like int, boolean, double, or char store null values in Java?
No, primitive data types can't store null.
They always have some value. For example, int has 0, boolean has false, and double has 0.0. If we need null, we use wrapper classes.

Why are wrapper classes needed when we want to store primitive values inside Java collections?
Java collections can store only objects, not primitive values.
So, we use wrapper classes like Integer, Double, Boolean, and Character.
They convert primitive values into objects.


What is the simple difference between autoboxing and unboxing in Java?
Autoboxing means converting a primitive value into a wrapper object automatically.
For example, int to Integer.
Unboxing means converting a wrapper object back into a primitive value automatically.
For example, Integer to int.

How can autoboxing create a confusing result when we compare two Integer objects using the double equal operator?
When we compare two Integer objects using the double equal operator, it may compare object references, not actual values. Because of caching, sometimes the result can be true and sometimes false. So, it can confuse people.

Can unboxing create a NullPointerException if we try to convert a null wrapper object into a primitive value?
Yes, it can create a NullPointerException if the Integer value is null and we try to convert it into int. Java will try to unbox null.
Because null can't become a primitive, it gives a NullPointerException.

Why does Java not allow us to use pointers like C and C++?
Java does not allow direct pointers because Java wants to be more secure and simple.
Pointers can create memory problems and security issues.
So, Java gives references, but it hides direct memory addresses from us.


Can we run a Java application on a system where JRE is not installed separately? Is there any other way to package and run it?
Normally, a Java application needs JRE to run.
But in newer Java versions, we can use tools like jlink to create a custom runtime with the application.
Also, with GraalVM, we can create a native image.

Is it possible to install only JDK without JRE, or does JDK already contain the required runtime parts?
JDK already contains the required runtime parts to run Java applications. JDK is mainly for development, but it also has runtime support. So, we do not need a separate JRE when JDK is installed.

Which garbage collection algorithms are used by JVM to clean unused objects from memory?
JVM uses different garbage collection algorithms. Some common ideas are mark and sweep, mark and compact, and generational garbage collection. The actual algorithm depends on which garbage collector we are using.

If Java already has automatic garbage collection, then how can memory leaks still happen in a Java application?
Memory leaks can happen when objects are not needed but still some reference is pointing to them.
Garbage collector removes only unreachable objects. If an object is still reachable, garbage collector will not remove it.



Why do people say Java is not a 100% object-oriented programming language?
People say this because Java uses primitive data types like int, char, boolean, and double.
These are not objects. In a pure object-oriented language, everything should be an object.

What benefit does Java get by using primitive data types along with object-oriented features?
Primitive data types help Java to run faster and use less memory. They are simple and lightweight.
So, Java gets object-oriented features as well as performance benefits.

Why should we use getter and setter methods when we can directly make variables public and access them?
Getters and setters give control over data. We can add validation before setting a value.
We can also change internal logic later without changing other code. Public variables do not give this control.


Can we declare a top-level class as private or protected in Java, or is it only allowed for inner classes?
No, a top-level class can't be private or protected. A top-level class can be public or default.
Private and protected are mainly used for members or inner classes.

Is it valid to create a Java class without writing any fields or methods inside it?
Yes, it is valid. A class can be empty in Java. We can still create an object of that class, but that object will not have any special state or behaviour.

Can we use a private constructor in Java, and where is it mostly used?
Yes, we can use a private constructor. It is mostly used in Singleton classes and utility classes.
A private constructor stops other classes from creating objects directly.

Can we overload constructors in Java by creating multiple constructors with different parameters?
Yes, constructors can be overloaded. We can create multiple constructors in the same class with different parameters. This helps us create objects in different ways.


How can we create a Singleton class so that only one object of that class can be created?
To create a Singleton class, we make the constructor private.
Then we create one private static object of the same class.
After that, we provide one public static method to return that object.

What problem can happen in a Singleton class if two threads try to create the object at the same time?
If Singleton is not thread-safe, two threads can create two different objects at the same time.
This breaks the Singleton rule. To fix this, we can use a synchronized method, synchronized block, or eager initialization.

Why are multiple objects considered safe and useful when multiple threads are working together?
Immutable objects can't be changed after creation. So, many threads can use the same object safely. There is no fear that one thread will change the value while another thread is reading it.

What steps should we follow to create an immutable class in Java?
To create an immutable class, make the class final, make fields private and final, do not provide setters, initialize values using the constructor, and if a field is a mutable object, return a copy instead of the original object.

How does the final keyword help in making objects immutable and safe for multiple threads?
The final keyword helps because once a final variable is assigned, it can't be changed. This supports immutability. When object data does not change, it becomes safer to share between multiple threads.


Can a Java class extend itself directly, or will it create an error?
No, a class can't extend itself. If a class tries to extend itself, the compiler will give an error.
It creates circular inheritance, which is not allowed in Java.

Why does Java not support multiple inheritance using classes?
Java does not support multiple inheritance with classes because it can create confusion.
If two parent classes have the same method, Java will not know which method to use.
This is called the diamond problem.

What happens if a class contains even one abstract method inside it?
If a class has even one abstract method, then the class must be declared abstract.
We can't create an object of an abstract class directly.
The child class has to implement that abstract method.


When should we use an interface, and when should we extend an existing class?
Use an interface when we want to define rules that different classes should follow.
Use class extension when we want to reuse existing code and behaviour from the parent class.

Since Java does not support multiple inheritance with classes, how can we achieve similar behaviour using interfaces?
We can achieve similar behaviour using interfaces.
A class can implement multiple interfaces. This way, one class can follow rules from many interfaces.

Can an interface in Java have static methods, and how do we call those static methods?
Yes, an interface can have static methods. We can call them using the interface name. We do not need to create an object to call a static method of an interface.

Can a functional interface extend another interface and still remain a functional interface?
Yes, it can, but it should have only one abstract method in total. If the parent interface adds another abstract method, then it will not remain a functional interface.


What is dynamic method dispatch, and how does Java decide which overridden method to call at runtime?
Dynamic method dispatch means Java decides at runtime which overridden method should run.
It depends on the actual object, not on the reference type. This is runtime polymorphism.

Can constructors show polymorphism like normal overridden methods in Java?
No, constructors can't show polymorphism like methods.
Constructors are not inherited and can't be overridden.
We can overload constructors, but we can't override them.

Can we use this or super keywords inside a static method in Java?
No, we can't use this or super inside a static method.
A static method belongs to the class, not the object.
this and super need an object context.
So, they can't be used in a static context.


Suppose you added @Transactional, but still data is partially saved when an exception happens. How will you debug and fix it?
First, I will check where @Transactional is added.
It should mostly be added to the service layer method.
Then I will check what type of exception is coming.
By default, Spring rolls back only for unchecked exceptions like RuntimeException.
If it is a checked exception, rollback may not happen automatically.
To fix this, I can use @Transactional(rollbackFor = Exception.class).
I will also check whether the method is public.
If the method is private, the transaction will not work properly.
I will also check if the method is called from the same class.
If the same class method is calling it, the Spring proxy will not work.
So, I will move that method to another service class or call it through another Spring bean.


Suppose your Spring Boot application is working fine in normal traffic, but during high traffic, the response time becomes very high. How will you find the root cause?
First, I will not directly change the code.
I will first try to find where the slowness is coming from.
I will check application logs.
I will check API response time.
I will check database query time.
I will check memory and CPU usage.
I will check thread usage also.

In your project, one microservice is calling another microservice using REST, but sometimes the second service is slow or down. How will you handle timeout, retry, and fallback?

Suppose your JWT token is valid, but the user's role has changed in the database. How will you make sure old permissions are not misused?

Suppose cached data is showing old values even after the database is updated. How will you fix this issue?

In your project, database queries are increasing suddenly because of the N+1 query problem. How will you detect and solve it?

Suppose one API is throwing LazyInitializationException in production. How will you identify and fix it?

In your project, messages are processed from Kafka or RabbitMQ, but the same message is processed twice. How will you handle duplicate processing?

Suppose one microservice publishes an event, but the consumer service is down at that time. How will you make sure the event is not lost?

1. In your project, you have two implementations of the same interface, and Spring is confused about which bean to inject. How will you solve this?

2. Suppose Actuator is enabled in your production application, but you do not want everyone to access health metrics and environment details. How will you secure it?

3. In production, your application secrets, keys, and database passwords should not be kept in application.properties. How will you manage them securely?

4. In your microservices project, authentication is handled by one service, but other services also need to know whether the user is valid or not. How will you design security?

5. Suppose your application is calling three external APIs, and one of them has rate limits. How will you avoid crossing the limit and still keep your application stable?


1. In your project, one API is fetching the same master data again and again from the database. How will you use caching to improve performance?

2. In your project, one API returns thousands of records, and the frontend becomes slow. How will you implement pagination and sorting?

3. Suppose your application has different database URLs for Dev, QA, and Production. How will you manage this without changing the code every time?

4. In your project, users upload PDF or image files. How will you handle file upload validation, storage, and retrieval in Spring Boot?

5. Suppose uploaded files are currently stored inside the application server folder, and after deployment, the files are getting lost. What will you change?

6. In your project, you need to send a welcome email after user registration, but email sending should not slow down the registration API. How will you design this?

7. In your project, you need to trace one request across multiple microservices to find where it failed. How will you implement logging and tracing?

8. Suppose your Spring Boot application needs to be deployed using Docker and CI/CD. What steps will you follow from code push to deployment?

9. Suppose your Spring Boot application needs to support multiple languages like English and Hindi. How will you implement internationalization?

10. In your API, one API needs to handle a very high number of concurrent requests without blocking threads. When will you choose Spring WebFlux, and what mistakes will you avoid?

What will happen if we try to start the same thread two times in Java?

What problem was your project solving?

Why did you create a separate service for this?

What database was used by each service?

How did these services communicate?

What happened if the Payment Service was down?

How did you handle failures?

Our project was an order management system where customers could place orders, make payments, track delivery status, and customer support could manage refunds or failed orders.

Our project was used by bank employees to process loan applications, verify customer details, check eligibility, and generate approval and rejection decisions.

Our project was divided into multiple services based on business responsibility.
User Service was responsible for user profile and authentication.
Product Service was responsible for product catalog and availability.
Order Service was responsible for order creation, order status, and order history.
Payment Service was responsible for payment initiation, payment confirmation, and refund flow.
The Notification Service was used to send email or SMS updates to the customer.



Suppose you have an Order Service, Payment Service, and Inventory Service. How would you handle a situation where one service commits successfully but another service fails?
What are the internal differences between HashMap in Java 7 and Java 8, and why was it changed?
How does Spring handle circular dependencies, and when does it fail?
What happens internally when a class is loaded by the JVM?
How would you design a system to handle millions of concurrent API requests?
Why was double-checked locking considered broken before Java 5, and how was it fixed?
How would you prevent deadlocks in a multithreaded application?
What are the trade-offs between consistency and availability in distributed systems?
How does Hibernate manage the first-level and second-level cache internally?
What happens if you call an @Transactional method from within the same class?
How would you design a fault-tolerant Kafka consumer that avoids data loss?
What are the internal working principles of CompletableFuture?
How would you debug a production issue where CPU usage suddenly spikes to 100%?
What is the difference between synchronized and locking using ReentrantLock?
How does the JVM optimize code at runtime using JIT compilation?
What are the challenges of schema evolution in Kafka, and how do you handle them?
How would you implement a distributed lock, and what are the pitfalls?
What happens when a thread pool is exhausted in Java?

30 microservices interview questions
1. In your project, two different microservices are showing different data for the same user. For example, the User Service shows one email address, but the Order Service or Payment Service shows an old email address. How will you identify the root cause and fix this data inconsistency?
2. In your project, two microservices are trying to update the same customer data at the same time. One service is updating the customer profile, and another service is updating the customer verification status. How will you avoid wrong data updates or data overwriting?
3. One microservice publishes events to Kafka and RabbitMQ, but due to a bug, it starts sending incorrect data to multiple services. How will you stop this bad data from spreading across the system?
4. If one user request goes through the API Gateway, then Order Service, Payment Service, Inventory Service, and Notification Service, but the request fails somewhere in between, how will you trace exactly where the request failed?
5. If Kafka and RabbitMQ messages are getting stuck in the queue and consumers are not processing them, how will you debug and fix this message backlog issue?
6. In your project, one internal microservice is accidentally exposed to the internet and starts receiving unknown or malicious traffic. How will you secure this internal service immediately?
7. If the business team wants to release a new feature only for 10% of users first, and if everything works fine, then release it to all users, how will you design this feature rollout?
8. One API request is making too many internal microservice calls, and because of that, the response is becoming slow. How will you reduce the number of service calls and improve performance?
9. You are migrating a monolithic application to microservices, but some modules are tightly connected with each other. How will you safely break these modules into separate microservices?
10. Users from different countries are using the application, but users from some locations are facing slow response times. How will you design the microservices system for low latency globally?
11. One microservice handles critical payment or financial data where failure is not acceptable. How will you make this service highly reliable and fault-tolerant?
12. Traffic suddenly becomes very high, like thousands or millions of requests coming in a short time. How will you design your microservice system so it can scale properly?
13. In production, one microservice suddenly starts using very high CPU after deployment. How will you debug this production performance issue?
14. You need to support real-time updates like chat messages, order status updates, live notifications, or alerts. How will you design this in microservices?
15. Your application is calling a third-party API for payment, KYC, SMS, or email, and that API starts failing randomly. How will you protect your system from this failure?
16. One user request triggers more than 50 internal service calls. Do you think this is a good design? If not, how will you improve this design?
17. Network latency is very high between microservices. Will microservices still be better than a monolithic architecture?
18. Before releasing microservices to production, how will you test them properly so that individual services and the complete user flow both work correctly?
19. Database traffic is increasing because read and write operations are growing. How will you scale the database without downtime?
20. One database table needs a schema change, but the old service version and new service version will run together for some time. How will you handle this schema change safely?
21. Users are seeing old data because the data is coming from the cache and not from the latest database value. How will you handle cache invalidation?
22. Multiple services are updating the same data, but the updates are coming in different orders. How will you maintain data integrity and the correct update sequence?
23. Due to a network failure, half of the microservices become unreachable. How should your system behave in this situation so that the complete application does not crash?
24. The product team says that they want both strong consistency and high availability all the time. Is it always possible in a distributed microservices architecture?
25. Retries are added to handle temporary failures, but now retries are increasing the load on the system and creating more failures. Why does this happen, and how will you fix it?
26. One microservice is working correctly and not throwing any errors, but its response time is very high. How will you debug this high-latency issue?
27. Messages are getting processed in the wrong order. For example, an update event is processed before a create event. How will you maintain the correct sequence?
28. Read traffic is very high, but write traffic is low. How will you use the CQRS design pattern to improve read performance?


Does using Optional completely protect an application from NullPointerException?
No, Optional does not completely protect an application from NullPointerException.
It helps us handle missing values without writing too many null checks.
But we must use it correctly. For example, calling Optional.of() with a null value will throw a NullPointerException.
Also, calling get() on an empty Optional will throw a NoSuchElementException.
It is better to use methods like orElse(), orElseGet(), ifPresent(), or orElseThrow().

Can an interface still be called a functional interface if it contains multiple methods?
Yes, a functional interface can contain multiple methods.
But it must have only one abstract method.
It can have multiple default methods and static methods.
It can also have methods that come from the Object class.
As long as there is only one abstract method, we can use that interface with a lambda expression or method reference.

Why can converting a normal stream into a parallel stream sometimes make the application slower?
A parallel stream divides the work and processes it using multiple threads.
But dividing the work, starting the tasks, and combining the results also takes time.
For a small collection or a simple operation, this extra work may take more time than normal stream processing.
Parallel streams can also be slower when order must be maintained or when multiple threads are changing shared data.
So, a parallel stream is not always faster. We should use it only when it actually improves performance.



Can a Java stream be reused after executing a terminal operation?
No, a Java stream can't be reused after a terminal operation.
Methods like collect, count, forEach, reduce, and findFirst are terminal operations.
Once one of these methods runs, the stream is finished.
If we try to use the same stream again, Java normally throws an IllegalStateException.
To process the data again, we need to create a new stream from the original collection.

Does Java create a new object in the same way when we use a lambda expression instead of an anonymous inner class?
No, Java does not handle them in the same way.
An anonymous inner class creates an object of a separate anonymous class.
A lambda expression does not create a separate class in the same traditional way.
The JVM handles lambdas in a more flexible way and may even reuse the same lambda object in some cases.
So, we should use a lambda for its behaviour and should not depend on whether it creates a new object every time.

Why can a lambda expression access a local variable but can't modify that variable?
A lambda expression can use a local variable only when that variable is final or effectively final.
Effectively final means that we assign the value once and do not change it later.
A local variable belongs to the method, and the method may finish before the lambda runs.
Because of this, Java copies the value for the lambda to use.
If Java allowed that local variable to change, it could create confusion about which value the lambda should use.


Why does nothing happen when we call filter or map on a stream without a terminal operation?
filter and map are intermediate operations.
They only prepare the steps that the stream should perform.
They do not start processing the data immediately.
The actual processing begins only when we call a terminal operation such as collect, count, forEach, or reduce.
So, without a terminal operation, the stream does not process anything.

Why does Java 8 allow interfaces to contain method implementation without turning them into abstract classes?
Java 8 introduced default methods so that existing interfaces could be updated safely.
Before Java 8, adding a new method to an interface forced every implementation class to implement that method.
This could break a lot of existing code.
With a default method, the interface itself can provide the method body by using the default keyword.
This allowed Java to add methods like stream() to the Collection interface without breaking old collection classes.


Why does map sometimes produce a stream of streams while flatMap produces a single stream?
map changes each element into another value.
If every element is changed into a stream, the result will contain multiple streams.
For example, if each department gives us a stream of employees, map will create a Stream<Stream<Employee>>.
flatMap also converts each department into a stream of employees, but then it joins all those streams together.
So, the final result becomes one Stream<Employee>.

Why can findAny() be faster than findFirst() when working with a parallel stream?
findFirst() returns the first element according to the original stream order.
In a parallel stream, different threads process different parts of the data at the same time.
Java may need to wait and check which result actually comes first.
findAny() does not need to maintain this order.
It can return any element found by any thread, so it may finish faster in a parallel stream.


How can you identify whether a requirement needs a Predicate, Function, Consumer, or Supplier?
Use a Predicate when you need to check a condition and return true or false.
Use a Function when you need to take one value and convert it into another value.
Use a Consumer when you need to take a value and perform an action without returning anything.
Use a Supplier when you need to provide a value without taking any input.
For example, filtering uses a Predicate, mapping uses a Function, printing uses a Consumer, and creating an object can use a Supplier.

When can a lambda expression be replaced with a method reference, and when can it not be replaced?
A lambda can be replaced with a method reference when it only calls an existing method.
For example, name -> System.out.println(name);
can be written as: System.out::println
But if the lambda contains extra conditions, calculations, or multiple statements, we normally can't replace it directly with a method reference.
A method reference should be used when it makes the code shorter and easier to understand.


How does reduce() method convert an entire stream into one final value?
reduce() combines the stream elements one by one.
For example, suppose we want to add all the numbers.
It adds the first two numbers, then adds the next number to that result, and continues until all numbers are processed.
At the end, it gives us one final value.
We can use reduce() for sum, product, maximum value, minimum value, or joining strings.


Why is the value passed to orElse created even when the Optional already contains a value?
Java first prepares the value passed to orElse and then calls the orElse method.
Because of this, the default value is created even when the Optional already has a value.
orElseGet() works differently.
It accepts a Supplier, and that Supplier runs only when the Optional is empty.
So, when the default value requires a database call, service call, or heavy calculation, orElseGet() is usually a better choice.

What is CompletableFuture different from simply creating and starting a new thread?
A new thread allows us to run one task separately.
But we still have to write extra code to get the result, handle errors, or connect one task with another.
CompletableFuture provides ready-made methods for these tasks.
We can change a result using thenApply(), use a result with thenAccept(), combine two tasks using thenCombine(), and handle errors using exceptionally().
It also uses a thread pool, so we do not need to create and manage every thread ourselves.

How are groupingBy and partitioningBy different when both are used to divide stream elements into groups?
groupingBy can divide elements into many groups.
For example, employees can be grouped by department, city, or job role.
Each department or city becomes a separate key.
partitioningBy divides elements into only two groups.
Its keys are always true and false.
For example, we can divide numbers into even and odd groups.

Why was a completely new date and time API required when Java already had Date and Calendar?
The old Date and Calendar classes were difficult and confusing to use.
They were mutable, which means their values could be changed after creation.
They were also not safe to share between multiple threads.
Some behaviours were confusing. For example, months in Calendar started from zero.
Java 8 introduced the java.time package with simpler classes like LocalDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime, and ZonedDateTime.
These classes are immutable, thread-safe, and easier to use.


How does lazy evaluation prevent Java streams from processing unnecessary elements?

Intermediate operations like filter and map do not run immediately.
They wait until a terminal operation is called.
When processing starts, Java can move one element through the complete stream pipeline at a time.
If an operation like findFirst, anyMatch, or limit gets the required result, Java can stop early.
Because of this, the stream does not always need to process every element.


If both contain data, why is a stream not considered a data structure like a collection?
A collection stores data.
A stream does not store data. It only processes data coming from another source.
That source can normally be used many times, but a stream can normally be used only once.
So, a collection is used to store data, while a stream is used to process data.


Why does filter keep the same type of elements while map can completely change their type?
filter only checks whether an element should stay in the stream.
It either keeps the element or removes it.
It does not change the element, so the type remains the same.
map changes each element into another value.
For example, it can change an Employee object into an Employee name, which is a String.
So, filter selects elements while map transforms elements.


Why are static methods inside an interface not inherited by its implementation classes?
A static method belongs to the interface itself.
It does not belong to an object of the implementation class.
This is why we can call it using the interface name.
For example, MyInterface.display()
An implementation class does not inherit this method.
Default methods are inherited, but static methods remain connected only to the interface.


What happens when a class implements two interfaces that contain the same default method?
Java becomes confused because both interfaces provide the same default method.
It can't automatically decide which method to use.
Because of this, the class gets a compile-time error.
The class must override the method and provide its own implementation.
It can also call a particular interface method like this:
Interface.super.display().

Why did Java introduce IntStream, LongStream, DoubleStream when Stream already existed?
Stream<Integer> works with Integer objects, not directly with primitive int values.
Changing between int and Integer is called boxing and unboxing.
When we process a large amount of numeric data, this conversion can use extra memory and time.
IntStream, LongStream, DoubleStream work directly with primitive values.
They also provide useful methods like sum, average, min, max.
Why can forEach() change the output order of a parallel stream while forEachOrdered() does not?
In a parallel stream, different threads process different elements at the same time.
With forEach(), every thread prints or processes its element as soon as it finishes.
Because of this, the output order can change.
forEachOrdered() waits and keeps the original order of the stream.
However, maintaining the order may make parallel processing a little slower.


What is idempotency in REST APIs, and why is it important?
How does Kafka ensure message durability and reliability?
What is a race condition, and how can you prevent it?
How does the Java Stream API handle parallel processing?
How do you handle transactions in a distributed system?

What is the difference between JPQL and native SQL queries?
What is the purpose of the @Bean annotation in Spring?
How does Spring Boot simplify application configuration compared to Spring?
What is the difference between heap and stack memory in Java?
Can you explain how the JVM executes a Java program step by step?

Are you involved in deployment?
Yes, I was involved in deployment activities from the application side. I used to monitor the pipeline, verify the build, check the deployment status, and perform post-deployment validation

Why does LazyInitializationException occur in Hibernate?

What is the N+1 query problem in Hibernate, and how would you solve it?
How would you store database passwords and API keys securely in a Spring Boot application?
How would you manage different configurations for development, testing, and production?

What happens when a @Transactional method calls an @Async method?
Why might @Transactional not work when one method calls another method inside the same class?
When would you use ReentrantLock instead of the synchronized keyword?
How would you identify and fix a race condition in an application?
When can parallel streams make an application slower?
What happens when a mutable object is used as a key in a HashMap and its value is changed?

A retry mechanism sends the same order request twice. How would you prevent duplicate order creation?
Two users try to update the same database record at the same time. How would you prevent incorrect data?
How would you design an API that can handle millions of requests?
Your Java application's memory usage keeps increasing in production. How would you find the cause?
One microservice becomes slow and starts affecting all other services. How would you control the problem?

A payment API times out, but the payment may already be completed. How would you prevent the payment from happening twice?

Explain the deployment process in your project.
test changes locally,commit code+raise pr,code review,pr approved code merge ,

What are your responsibilities as a Java developer during the deployment?


--------------------------
Multithreading in Java
Multithreading in Java is the process of executing multiple threads simultaneously.
A thread is a lightweight subprocess and the smallest unit of processing.
Multiprocessing and multithreading are both used to achieve multitasking.

Multitasking
Multitasking is the process of executing multiple tasks simultaneously to utilize the CPU efficiently.

Types of Multitasking:
1.Process-Based Multitasking
Each process has its own memory (separate address space).
Processes are heavyweight.
Communication cost is high between processes.

2. Thread-Based Multitasking
Threads share the same memory (common address space).
Threads are lightweight.
Communication cost is low between threads.

What is a Thread in Java?
A thread is a lightweight subprocess and the smallest unit of processing. It represents a separate path of execution in a program.
Threads are independent. If an exception occurs in one thread, it does not affect other threads. Threads use a shared memory area.
Life Cycle of a Thread:
New, Active, Blocked/Waiting, Timed Waiting, Terminated.
New: Whenever a new thread is created, it is always in the New state.
Active:When a thread invokes the `start()` method, it moves from the New state to the Active state. The Active state contains two states within it: one is Runnable and the other is Running.


Java 17 is a Long-Term Support (LTS) release that brings performance improvements, security enhancements, and developer productivity features.
Sealed Classes
Pattern Matching for Switch
Record Patterns
Enhanced Pseudo-Random Number Generators
Text Blocks
Foreign Function and Memory API
Removal of the Experimental AOT & JIT Compiler
Stronger Encapsulation by Default

What is Garbage Collection?
Garbage collection is the process of identifying and reclaiming memory occupied by objects that are no longer in use by the application. It helps in automatic memory management and prevents memory leaks.


javainterviewbuddy
Q.how would you design a system to handle idempotent apis in a distributed microservices architecture?

Q.2:what happens internally in java when you use concurrenthashmap under high contention and how is it different from synchronized block?

Q.3:how would you handle partial failure in a microservices transaction without using ditributed transactions?

Q.5.how would you design a rate limiting system for a public api at scale?

Q.7.how does kafka ensure message ordering and what breaks that guarantees?

Q.11.how would you design a feature flag system that supports dynamic rollout without redeployment?

Q.13.how does @Transactional behave in spring when methods are called internally within the same class?

Q.14.how would you ensure exactly once processing in a kafka +flink pipeline?

Q.18.how would you handle schema evoluation kafka without bkeaking consumers?

Q.19.what happens if your database goes down in a microservices architecture?whats your fallback strategy?

Q.20.how would you implement distributed tracing across microservices?

Q21.what is the difference between thread local and normal varibales and where can it go wrong?

Q.22.how would you design a caching strategy for frequently accessed data with consistency requirements?

Q.23.what are the hidden problems with pagination using offset in large datasets?



